# User Authorization in SQL

SQL has the concept of *Authorization IDs* which are basically usernames

There's a special authorization ID `PUBLIC` which includes any user

Authorization IDs may be granted privileges, similar to a Unix file system.


## Privileges

SQL defines 9 types of privileges:

These apply to relations (tables or views):
- `SELECT`*
- `INSERT`*
- `UPDATE`*
- `DELETE`

Others:
- `REFERENCES`*: the right to assert referential integrity
- `USAGE` applies to other schema elements 
- `TRIGGER` (self-explanatory)
- `EXECUTE` is the right to execute stored procedures/functions
- `UNDER` is the right to create subtypes 

* These may also have an associated list of attributes 

Different implementations may define others as well. 

A SQL statement cannot be executed without the privileges appropriate for that statement

```postgresql
SELECT *
FROM course
WHERE semester='S19';

INSERT INTO enroll(student_email, course_name, semester) 
SELECT email, 'Computer Lab', 'F19'
FROM student 
WHERE major = 'CSCI';
```

### Triggers and Privileges

A trigger is created using the `TRIGGER` privilege. However, the creator must have all the necessary privileges for the condition and action of the trigger as well. 

Then, the trigger is executed under the privileges of the creator, not the user who does the action that awakens it. 

## Granting Privileges

Two aspects to awarding privileges:
- How they're initially created
- How they're passed from user to user

SQL elements (schemas, modules, etc) have an owner. The owner has all privileges associated with that element.

Ownership is established at three points:
1. When a schema is created it, and all the tables and otehr elements within it, are owned by the user who created it.
2. When a session is created using a `CONNECT` there is an opportunity to associate an Authorization ID with the session
3. When a module is created, we have the option to give it an owner using an `AUTHORIZATION` clause. 
    - A module can also be created without one, but then the module's contents are publicly viewable, but the privileges for executing them must come from elsewhere. 
    
## Checking Privileges

Each schema, module, or session has an associated user (Authorization ID)

Any SQL operation has two parties:
- The database elements on which the operation is being performed 
- The agent that causes the operation 

The privileges available to the agent derive from an Authorization ID called the *current authorization ID*. 

This is either:
- Module authorization ID (if it exists), or
- Session Authorization ID otherwise

We execute the SQL statement only if the current authorization ID possesses all the necessary privileges.

Basically we can execute a statement when:
- The data is owned by the same user whose ID is the current authorization ID
- The user who's the current authorization ID has been granted the necessary privileges by the owner (or delegates)
- We're executing a module owned by the owner of the data, and we've been granted `EXECUTE` privileges
- We're executing a publicly available module with a session ID that has the necessary privileges

### Granting Privileges

SQL provides a `GRANT` statement to allow one user to give privileges to another. 

Each privilege has an associated `GRANT OPTION` that allows a user to grant the privilege.

`GRANT <privilege list> ON <database element> TO <user list> [WITH GRANT OPTION]`

The database element is typically a relation (table or view). Other elements must be preceded by their type

`GRANT EXECUTE ON PROCEDURE foo TO users`

We can use `ALL PRIVILEGES` allows for granting everything 

### Grant diagrams

It can be helpful to use a directed graph to visualize privileges. Nodes are user and privilege. Edges show how they're granted.

### Revoking Prileges

A granted privilege may be revoked at any time.

`REVOKE <privileges> ON <element> FROM <user list>`

Then either:
- `CASCADE`: revoke any privileges that were granted solely because of the revoked privilege
- `RESTRICT`: the revoke only succeeds if `CASCADE` option wouldn't have removed any other privileges. 

We can also `REVOKE GRANT OPTION FOR ...` (also needs a `CASCADE`/`RESTRICT`)

# Semi-structured Data

So far, we've focused mostly on the relational data model.

The "semi-structured data model" is different: the schema is (generally) implied by the data, rather than being declared separately.

Semi-structured data generally plays two roles in Database:
- Useful as a mode of integration between or more systems that contain similar information. 
- Serves as the underlying model for notations like XML (now JSON, YAML, etc.) that are used to share data on the web. 

## Motivation for Semi-structured Data

Previous models (Relational, E/R Model, etc.) start with a schema. The schema provides a rigid framework in which the data is placed.

Rigidity has advantages:
- It allows for query optimization, as the query optimizer knows the structure of the data
- Also makes the data more reliable (checks, constraints, assertions, etc.)

Semi-structured model is motivated primarily by its flexibility. 

Sometimes it's referred to as "schemaless." More accurately, the data is self-describing. 

The structure can vary over time, even within the same database 

Flexibility is an advantage. Being able to add attributes to just a few elements, for example. Or creating relationships between just a few elements without worrying about the rest. 

### Representation

We can represent semi-structured data as a collection of *nodes*. Nodes are either leaf or interior.

Leaf nodes have associated data. 

Interior nodes have one or more edges/arcs out.

Arcs are labeled to show how the head relates to the tail

One interior node has no incoming arcs. This is the *root* and represents the whole database. 

Every node must be reachable from the root. (Tree structure is not required)

## XML eXtensible Markup Lanuage

It's a tag-based notation, originally designed for "marking" documents (similar to HTML)

Unlike HTML, XML's tags are intended to represent the meaning of the data. 

Tags are represented with angle brackets `< >`

Usually have an opening and closing tag: `<x> ... </x>`, but we can also have a single tag `<x/>`

Tags are nested.

XML is designed to be used in two different modes:
- Well-formed XML; we can use whatever tags we need or want. The tags must still be nested properly
- Valid XML: uses a Document Type Definition (DTD) that specifies what tags are allowed where. 
    - Intermediary between truly semi-structured data and more strict-schema approaches. 
    
### Well-Formed XML

Must begin with a declaration that it's XML

Must have a single root element that is the entire body of text

#### Attributes

An XML element can have attributes (name-value pairs) within its opening tag. It's an alternative way to represent leaf nodes. 

It's also a way to represent relationships that don't fit neatly into a tree structure

#### Namespaces 

There are situation where tags may come from multiple different sources and have conflicting names

Namespaces allow for resolution

We apply a namespace to a tag to distinguish it from other tags with the same name.

We use use `xmlns:name="URI"` in the opening tag 

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes" ?>
<courses xmlns:c="http://example.com/course-names.xml">
    <course semester="S19" professor="123" capacity="175">
        <c:name>Database Systems</name>
    </course>
    <course semester="F18" professor="123">
        <c:name>Database Systems</name>
    </course>
    <faculty>
        <professor id="123">
            <name>Johnson</name>
        </professor>
    </faculty>

</courses>
```

### Storing XML

We can store XML in a traditional database. However, we need to maintain efficiency. 

Two approaches: 
- Store the XML in parsed form and provide a set of tools to query it. Two ones are the Simple API for XML (SAX), and the Document Object Model (DOM)
- Represent the documents and their elements as relations and use a relational DBMS

Postgres defines an XML datatype. It also has functions for querying and validating the data. 

## Document Type Definitions

A DTD is basically a schema for XML documents. 

We lose the flexibility to use whatever tags we want.

We gain agreement on the structure of the data. The idea is that a company or community will publish their DTD, establishing a shared view of the semantics of the elements.

### Basic Structure

``` 
<!DOCTYPE root-tag [
    <!ELEMENT element-name(components)>
    --- more elements --- 
]>
```

The opening root-tag and its closing tag surround a document that conforms to the rules set forth in the given DTD. 

Element declarations give a tag and a set of components, which may or must appear within it. 

Two special cases of components:
- `(#PCDATA)` "parsed character data" means that element has text content but no elements nested within it
- `EMPTY` no closing tag 

The components of an element are generally other elements

Several operators control how often these elements occur:
- `*` zero or more times
- `+` one or more times
- `?` zero or one times
- `(element1|element2|element3)` <- one of these is allowed 

We can use parenthese to group:

`<!ELEMENT address(street, (city | zipcode))>`

#### Attributes

We can also specify what attributes an element can have

`<!ATTLIST element-name attribute-name type>`

Several attributes may be defined

Most common type is `CDATA` (no `#`)

We can also use an enumerated type: `(a|b|c)`

Optionally followed by `#REQUIRED` or `#IMPLIED` (optional)

`ID` type, which is used with `IDREF` (which is essentially a pointer to an ID)