# Relational Model

Review from last class

Relational model uses two-dimensional tables called Relations

Columns are Attributes

Rows are Tuples

The name of the Relation, along with the list of its attributes forms its *Schema*.

The schema can optionally include type information about the attributes:

``` 
Course(name:String, semester:String, location:String, time:Time, capacity:Integer)
```

## Keys of Relations

Many types of constraints that may be placed on the data within a relation. Most will be discussed later

Key constraints are fundamental.

A set of attributes forms a key for a relation if we do not allow two tuples to have the same values for all attributes in the key.

*Discussion*

What are possible keys for `Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity, student, instructor)`?

- Name + Semester
- Semester + Location + Time
- Student + name + semester
- Student + time
- Student + time + semester
- Instructor + time + semester

We indicate the key by underlining the attributes of the key. 

Remember that a key is a statement about all possible instances of a relation, not just a description of the current instance.

In practice, artificial keys are common (student id, or ssn).

Example schema:

``` 
Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity)
Classrooms(building, room, capacity, av_capable)
Student(name, address, phone, email)
Registered(course_name, student_email, semester)
```

We can specify a primary key for the a relation, but it only matters for implementations of the model. It has no meaning in relational theory.

## Defining Relations in SQL

Structured Query Language (SQL) is the main language used to define and manipulate relational databases.

Two main aspects:
- Data-Definition Language, for defining schemas
- Data-Manipulation Language, for querying and modifying data

The latest SQL standard is SQL 2016 (textbook is SQL 1999).

Most commercial DBMS vendors implement something similar to, but not exactly the same as, the SQL Standard.

We'll use Postgres.

Many others: MySQL, Oracle, SQLServer, DB2, MariaDB, SQLite

### Relations in SQL

Three types of relations:
- Stored Relations, called Tables
    - Exist in the database
    - Have tuples
    - Can be queried or modified
- Views: relations defined by computation
    - Not stored: constructed on demand
- Temporary Tables: constructed by the SQL language processor when executing queries. Discarded when done.

We'll start with the DDL portion of SQL, specifically how to declare tables.

`CREATE TABLE name(attributes)` is the basic command to create a stored relation.

Defines the attributes and their types.

Can also define/declare constraints, indexes, etc.

### SQL Datatypes

- Character Strings, of fixed or varying length
    - `CHAR(n)` fixed length character string of length `n` (blank padded)
    - `VARCHAR(n)` variable length character string, up to `n` in length
    - Postgres also defines a `TEXT` type
- Bit strings of fixed or varying length
    - `BIT(n)` fixed length bit string of length `n`
    - `BIT VARYING(n)` variable length bit string
- Boolean
    - `TRUE`, `FALSE`, or `UNKNOWN`
- Integer types
    - `INT` or `INTEGER`
    - `SHORT INTEGER` 
    - `LONG` or `LONG INTEGER` or `BIG INT`
- Floating point numbers
    - `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE PRECISION`
    - `DECIMAL(n, m)` or `NUMERIC(n, m)` a decimal number of length n, with m decimal places (`NUMERIC(8, 4)` for 1000.0000)
- Dates and Times
    - `DATE` ex: `DATE'YYYY-MM-DD'`
    - `TIME` ex: `TIME'HH:MM:SS.sss`
    - `TIMESTAMP` both date and time
    - Postgres also defines `INTERVAL` 
    - Notes: Dates and times may be cast to strings. Strings, if properly formatted, may be coerced into dates and times.
- Numerous other types: `BLOB`, `XML`, implementation-specific types

### Creating tables

```postgresql
CREATE TABLE Course(
  name VARCHAR(127),
  semester CHAR(3),
  location VARCHAR(63),
  time VARCHAR(31),
  capacity INT
);

DROP TABLE Course;

ALTER TABLE Course ADD instructor VARCHAR(255);
ALTER TABLE Course DROP instructor;

ALTER TABLE Course ADD textbook VARCHAR(255) DEFAULT 'none';

```

### Default Values

When we create tuples or modify them, we might not have values for all of the attributes. 

If we don't specify a value, SQL will fill in `NULL`. We might not want that, so we can define a default value.

### Declaring Keys

2 ways to declare a key:
- Declare one attribute to be the key when we define it
- Add to the list of items declared in the schema a declaration with a specific set of attributes

There are two declarations we can use:

`PRIMARY KEY` and `UNIQUE`

```postgresql
CREATE TABLE Course(
  name VARCHAR(127) PRIMARY KEY ,
  semester CHAR(3),
  location VARCHAR(63),
  time VARCHAR(31),
  capacity INT
);

CREATE TABLE Course(
  name VARCHAR(127),
  semester CHAR(3),
  location VARCHAR(63),
  time VARCHAR(31),
  capacity INT,
  PRIMARY KEY (name, semester),
  UNIQUE (semester, location, time)
);
```

If we use `PRIMARY KEY`, the DBMS will not allow `NULL` values in any of the attributes of the key.

```
CREATE TABLE example(
  one VARCHAR(255),
  two VARCHAR(255) DEFAULT 'value',
  UNIQUE (two)
);

(a, null)
(b, null)
(a, null)


(a, 'value')
(b, 'value')
```

# Algebraic Query Language

*Relational Algebra* is a special algebra that defines operators that construct new relations from existing relations

Not used directly by commercial DBMS implementations (SQL is used instead).

SQL is built around relational algebra and provides some "syntactic sugar" on top of it.

Why relational algebra? It's useful because it's less powerful than c or Java. The limits allow for ease of use and better optimization.

What is an algebra? 

An algebra in general consists of operators and atomic operands (and parentheses for grouping).

Relational Algebra's atomic operands are:
- Variables that stand for relations (e.g., R and S)
- Constants that are finite relations

Operators fall into four broad categories:
- Set operators (Union, Intersection, Difference) applied applied
- Operators that remove part of a relation
    - Selection removes some tuples
    - Projection removes some attributes (columns)
- Operators that combine the tuples of two relations
    - Cartesian Product (all possible pairs)
    - Joins (selectively pair tuples)
- Renaming

## Set Operations

Standard Intersection, Union, and Difference 

R ∩ S
R ∪ S
R − S

Some restrictions apply when we apply them to relations:
- R and S must have identical schemas (both names and types of all attributes must match)
- Before we do the computation, we re-order the columns so that the attributes are in the same order

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

S(a, b)
(1, 2)
(2, 3)
(3, 4)

R ∩ S
(1, 2)

R ∪ S
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)
(2, 3)
(3, 4)

R − S
(1, 3)
(2, 4)
```

## Removal Operations

Projection: π a, b (R) 

Produces from R a new relation that has only some of the columns in R

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

π a (R) 
(1)
(2)
```

Selection: σ c (R)

Produces from R a new relation with only some of the tuples of R (those that satisfy c)

σ semester=S19 (Course)

## Combining relations

Cartesian Product ("cross-product" or just "product"): R × S

Produces the set of pairs (rs) that can be be formed by choosing r to be any tuple from R, and s to be any tuple from S.

When applied to relations, we end up with a set of longer tuples whose schema is the schema for R plus the schema for S

By convention, the first relation's attributes are first.

If there are duplicate names, we disambiguate by prepending relation name and `.`.

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

S(b, c)
(2, 5)
(3, 5)

R × S (a, R.b, S.b, c)
(1, 2, 2, 5)
(1, 3, 2, 5)
(2, 4, 2, 5)
(1, 2, 3, 5)
(1, 3, 3, 5)
(2, 4, 3, 5)


```

Joins allow us to pair only those tuples that match in some way.

Natural Join: R ⨝ S

We pair only those tuples that agree on all values of whatever attributes R and S have in common

We end up with a relation whose schema is the Union of the schemas of R and S.

It's possible for any given tuple to pair with more than one tuple

A tuple that pairs is called a *joined tuple*

A tuple that does not pair is called a *dangling tuple*

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

S(b, c)
(2, 5)
(3, 5)


R ⨝ S (a, b, c)
(1, 2, 5)
(1, 3, 5)

R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

S(b, c)
(2, 5)
(2, 6)
(3, 5)


R ⨝ S (a, b, c)
(1, 2, 5)
(1, 2, 6)
(1, 3, 5)
```

Theta join pairs tuples using a specific join condition

R ⨝ c S

Theta joins produce a schema like that produced by the cartesian product. The overlapping attributes are disambiguated, not merged.

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

S(b, c)
(2, 5)
(3, 5)

R ⨝ a < 2 S (a, R.b, S.b, c)
(1, 2, 2, 5)
(1, 3, 2, 5)
(1, 2, 3, 5)
(1, 3, 3, 5)

```

## Renaming

ρ (d, e) (R)

``` 
R(a, b)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4)

ρ (d, e) (R)

R(d, e)
(1, 2)
(1, 3)
(2, 4) 
```

## Combining operations to form queries

Like other algebras we can form expressions of arbitrary complexity by applying additional operators to the results of previous operations

Example: find a relational algebraic expression that produces a relation representing all of the class in Spring 2019 that take place in classrooms with space for 50 or more students

``` 
( σ semester = S19 ( Course )) ⨝ capacity >= 50 AND course.location = classroom.location ( Classroom )

```

−
∪
∩
σ
π
×
⨝ 
θ
ρ
⊆
∅