# Views

Relations defined by the `CREATE TABLE` statements actually exist on disk somewhere. 

Another type of relation in SQL is the (virtual) View. 

Views do not exist physically in the database. 

Defined by an expression (like a query)

Can be queries as if they existed. (Sometimes can be modified)

## Declaring Views

`CREATE VIEW name AS query`

Note the distinction between Relation, Table, and View. 

```postgresql
CREATE VIEW database_students AS 
SELECT name, email
FROM student, enroll
WHERE student.email = enroll.student_email 
AND enroll.course_name like '%Database%';

drop view database_students;

SELECT * from database_students;

```

## Querying Views

A view may be queried exactly as if it were a stored table.

We can construct queries with both tables and views

```postgresql
SELECT *
FROM database_students, grades
WHERE database_students.email = grades.student_email;
```

### Renaming Attributes

We can specify a different set of attribute names if we want or need to:

```postgresql
CREATE VIEW database_students(student_name, student_email) AS 
SELECT name, email
FROM student, enroll
WHERE student.email = enroll.student_email 
AND enroll.course_name like '%Database%';

drop view database_students;
```

## Modifying Views

It's possible in some circumstances to modify a view. 

Consider the implications:
- What does it mean to insert a tuple into a view? 

```postgresql
INSERT INTO database_students(student_name, student_email) VALUES ('ed', 'ed@example.com');
```

What about updates:

```postgresql
UPDATE database_students SET student_name = 'Alice' WHERE student_name='alice';
```

In many cases, the answer is "You can't do that."

A subset of views (called updatable views) are simple enough that modification of the view can be translated into updates of actual tables.

Simplest modification is to delete the view altogether

`DROP VIEW name`;

Note the difference: 
`DROP TABLE name`;

When are modifications to a view permitted?

Modifications are generally permitted on a view that is defined on some attibutes of a relation R using a `SELECT` statement when:
- The `WHERE` clause must not involve R in a subquery
- The `FROM` clause involves a single instance of R, and no other relations
- The list of attributes in the `SELECT` clause must include enough attributes that for every other attribute, we can fill in the values using defaults and `NULL`.

```postgresql
CREATE VIEW database_enrollment AS 
SELECT student_email, semester 
FROM enroll 
WHERE course_name like '%Database%';

INSERT INTO database_enrollment(student_email, semester) VALUES ('ed@example.com', 'S19');
INSERT INTO enroll(student_email, semester) VALUES ('ed@example.com', 'S19');

SELECT * from database_enrollment;
SELECT * from enroll;
```

In this case, an insertion into the view can be applied directly to the underlying table. Similar to an `INSERT` where not all of the values are defined.

Note that it's possible to have an updatable view where inserted tuples don't become part of the view.

Like `INSERT`s, `UPDATE`s and `DELETE`s are passed through to the underlying relation. However, the `WHERE` clause from the `VIEW` definition is appended to make sure that only tuples that were visible in the view are affected.

```postgresql
SELECT * from database_enrollment;

UPDATE database_enrollment SET student_email='alice2@example.com'
WHERE student_email = 'alice@example.com';
```

## Instead-of Triggers on Views 

We can use `INSTEAD OF` where we would otherwise use `BEFORE` or `AFTER` when we define a trigger for a view. 

That will cause the action of the trigger to be performed instead of the triggering event. 

This allows a database designer to simulate an updatable view, even where the view definition would otherwise preclude it.

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION insert_database_student() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
  BEGIN 
    INSERT INTO enroll(student_email, course_name, semester)
    VALUES (NEW.student_email, 'Database Systems', 'S19');
    RETURN NEW;
end
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;

CREATE TRIGGER insert_database_student_trigger
  INSTEAD OF INSERT ON database_students
  FOR EACH ROW 
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE insert_database_student();
  

INSERT INTO database_students(student_name, student_email) VALUES ('ed', 'ed@example.com');

SELECT * from database_students;
```

# Indexes in SQL

An *index* on an attribute A of a relation is a data structure that makes it easy to find all tuples with a fixed value for A.

We could think of an index as a binary search tree of key-value pairs, where the attribute A is the key, and the value is the location of the tuples containing A. 

The key for an index may be any attribute. It doesn't have to be a key for the relation. 

## Motivations for Indexes

How do we filter the tuples down to those specified in the `WHERE` clause of a query. 

Naive way would be to retrieve all tuples and test each individually against the WHERE clause. 

What if the vast majority of tuples won't pass part of the condition?

`SELECT * FROM course WHERE name='Database Systems' AND semester='S19'`

Better if we could get all the tuples for S19 and check the name (or vice-versa).

Even better if we could get both: multi-attribute index.

Or consider:

```postgresql
SELECT * 
FROM course, enroll 
WHERE student_email='x' AND course.semester='S19' 
  AND course.semester=enroll.semester AND course.name=enroll.course_name;
```

With indexes, we only need to consider the appropriate tuples from each relation

Otherwise we have to consider the whole join.

## Declaring Indexes

Creation of indexes is implementation-specific

`CREATE INDEX name ON table(column)`

We can specify more than one column

The order of the columns matters. You want to put the more used attribute first. 

`DROP INDEX name`

## Selection of Indexes

Creation of indexes involves a tradeoff

Any index will greatly speed up queries involving the key attributes, and may inprove joins involving those attributes as well

However, every index slows down `INSERT`s, `UPDATE`s and `DELETE`s, as the index must be continually maintained. 

### Cost model

Details of how the tuples of a relation are stored will be discussed later. For now, it's enough to say that the tuples are distributed over many pages (blocks) on disk. 

The big cost is bringing the page containing a tuple into memory. We'll assume no caching: every page we need must be read from disk.

### Useful indexes

Often the most useful index involves the key for a relation
- Queries involving a specific value for the key are common, so the index will be used often
- There is at most one tuple for a given key, so either 0 or 1 page needs to be retrieved

When an index is not on the key, there are two situations where it is commonly effective
1. If the attribute(s) is almost key for the relation (there are relatively few tuples with any given value)
2. If the tuples are "clustered" on that attribute.

### Calculating the best index to create

At face value, it would seem that more indexes are better

However, if modifications are common, additional indexes slow things down

Even updates and deletes involve a query, so estimation needs to be done carefully

Relations are stored over many disk blocks, so indexes reduce load time

However, indexes are also stored in disk blocks. 

We need to make some assumptions about the queries and modifications that are likely to be done

Consider: `enroll(student, course)`

Q1: `SELECT * FROM enroll WHERE student = x`
Q2: `SELECT * FROM enroll WHERE course = x`
I: `INSERT into enroll() VALUES(x, y)`

Make some assumptions about the data
- Relation fits on 20 blocks on disk: to check the full relation, the cost is 20
- Average student takes 4 courses
- Average course has 10 students
- With an index:
     - we need 4 reads to find a student's courses
     - we need 10 reads to find a course's students
- 1 read is needed every time we use an index
    - 1 additional cost to update an index
- 1 read is needed to find a block for insert, 1 write to disk (cost of insert is 2)

``` 
Action  No Index    Student     Course      Both
----------------------------------------------------
Q1      20          5           20          5
Q2      20          20          11          11
I       2           4           4           6

Avg     2 + 18p1    4 + p1      4 + 16p1    6 - p1 + 5p2
        + 18p2      + 16p2      + 7p2
    

```

We need to know the relative frequencies of the operations 

Assume that p1 and p2 are the relative frequencies of the queries, and 1 - p1 - p2 is the relative frequency of the insert.

Depending on the values for p1 and p2, the average costs differ for each option

### Automatic Selection of Indexes to create

There are a number of tools designed to help the database designer to figure out which indexes to create

In general:
1. Establish a query workload. We can examine logs (either DBMS or Application) and learn which queries are made with what frequences
2. Specify some constraints (e.g., indexes) that must or must not be made
3. The "tuning advisor" generates a list of possible indexes and evaluates each one. Running times are estimated
4. The index set resulting in the lowest cost for the given workload is suggested (or implemented automatically). 

# Materialized Views

A view describes how a new relation may be constructed from existing base tables. 

If a view is used frequently enough, it may be efficient to *materialize* it: store it at all times.

As with indexes, there's a cost associated with materializing it. 

`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW name(columns) AS query`

Postgres provides a few other options, including whether or not the view should be materialized when the statement is run. 

## Maintaining Materialized Views

```postgresql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW database_students AS 
SELECT student.name FROM enroll, student
WHERE email = student_email AND course_name = 'Database Systems';
```

We don't have to consider any update of attributes not mentioned in the query (changes of major, for example).

Other simplications allow us to avoid having to re-run the query every time there's an update. 

- An insert into the enroll table gives a student email. Since that's a key to the student table, there must be only one student tuple. So only one insert into the materialized view is needed. 
- A delete from the enroll table should have only one corresponding delete from the materialized view. 
- A change of course name might add a number of new tuples that would be added

The commonality is that all these updates are incremental. We don't have to re-create the whole view from scratch. 

### Periodic Maintenance of Materialized Views

There are use-cases where we leverage materialized views without worrying about the underlying cost of updates. 

