# Database Security Topics

## SQL Injection

A SQL Injection attack consists of insertion or "injection" of a SQL query via the input data from the client into the application.

A successful exploitation of a SQL Injection vulnerability can allow an attacker to:
- Read sensitive data
- Modify the database data
- execute administrative operations 
- Recover files on the DBMS system
- Possibly execute commands on the host OS

This builds on what we looked at last class

<examples>

## Storing Sensitive Data

So far, we've only considered plain text data. 

Some data is more sensitive

Two general categories of sensitive data:
- Personally identifiable information (SSN, bank account, credit numbers, etc.)
- Passwords or Credentials

### Symmetric Key Encryption

Data is encrypted with a public key or password and stored, so it can be retrieved later

We have the option for Postgres (or other implementations) to handle the encryption for us.

`pg_crypto` module that supports that. 

Basic idea:

We create an encrypted message that consists of two parts or "packets"
- Packet containing a session key (either symmetric or public key encrypted)
- Packet containing the data, encrypted with the session key 

Encrypting with a password:
1. A given password is hashed using a S2K (string to key) algorithm 
2. We use the hashed password or a randomly generated session key to encrypt the data packet
    - If password, we store the S2K settings 
    - Otherwise, we store the session key 

Encrypting with a public key:
1. A random session key is generated
2. Session key encrypted with the public key and stored 

Then we can do optional data manipulation (compression, UTF-8, etc.)

Then:
- Data is prefixed with random bytes
- Append the SHA1 Hash bytes + data 
- Encrypt with the session key, and store the data packet

Note that there is a period of time when both the key and unencrypted data exist on the server. (Vulnerable to a malicious database administrator).

### Asymmetric Encryption (storing passwords)

A hash algorithm is a one-way fuction that converts any amount of data into a fixed-length block.

Cannot be reversed. 

**General workflow for storing a password**

1. User create account
2. A password is provided, hashed and stored in the database 
    - At no point is the plaintext password written to disk 
3. When the user attempts to log in:
    1. Hash the given password
    2. Compare the hashed password to the hashed password that's stored (from step 2)
    3. If they match, grant access
        - If there's no match, never indicate that it's the wrong password (always invalid credentials)

Note that the hashing algorithms aren't the same as the ones used for hash tables. 

We want hashing algorithms that are time or resource instensive.

Current acceptable options: Argon2, PBKDF2, scrypt, bcrypt

Now we have a table of hashed passwords. If it's stolen, how much security do we have?

**Ways hashed passwords are broken** (offline attacks):
- Brute Force: iterate through the possible combinations 
- Dictionary/Topology attack:
    - Use known words. Start with the ones more commonly used in passwords
    - Use known password topologies 
- Lookup Tables: pre-compute hashes and stored passwords, and store them in a data structure 
- Reverse lookup tables: find users whose hashed passwords are the same 
- Rainbow tables: similar to a lookup table, but we sacrifice lookup speed to save memory 

We can only combat the first two with stronger password requirements. 

We combat the remaining three by using "salt." 

Lookup tables workd because the same hash is applied to all users. If two users have the same password, they'll have the same hash, and the work only needs to be done once. (This is particularly relevant because passwords are re-used)

Salt allows us to randomize the hash function a bit. 

We add (to the beginning or end) a random string called a "salt" to the password before hashing it.

Then we store the salt along with the hash. 

No protection against brute force attack. Salt does little to reduce the cost of a single attack. 

However, it does deny the attacker re-use of that attack. 

**Salting Mistakes**
- Salt re-use 
- Short salt: lookup tables are still possible (though more expensive) 
    - Use same size salt as the output of the hash function (SHA256 is 256 bits, so we'd use 256 bits of salt)
    
### Other common security mistakes

Don't invent a complicated scheme with double hashes, etc. It provides little added value and makes it easier to make mistakes. 

Don't roll your own cryptographic algorithms 

Standard well-tested approaches are harder to get wrong 

Generate salt with a secure random number generator 