# Boyce Codd Normal Form

A condition under which the anomalies (redudancy, update, deletion) can be guaranteed not to exist.

A relation R is in BCNF if and only if, whenever there is a nontrivial FD A -> B  for R, it is the case that A is a superkey of R.

Or the left side of every FD of R is a superkey.

We take a relation and *decompose* it into sub-relations that are in BCNF.

We want our decomposition to have subsets that all:
- are in BCNF
- the data in the original relation is faithfully represented by the data in the sub-relations

The strategy is to look for a nontrivial FD A->B that violates BCNF.

We optionally add to the right side as many attributes as are functionally determined by A.

Then we break R into two subsets:
- R1 = A union B 
- R2 = A union everything else that's not B

We keep applying the algorithm recursively to the results of each decomposition until no violations remain.

## BCNF Decomposition Algorithm

Input: A relation R, with its set of functional dependencies S

Output: a decomposition of R into relations, each of which is in BCNF

1. Check if R is in BCNF 
    - If yes, we're done 
2. Let X -> Y be a FD in S that violates BCNF 
    - Compute X+
    - Choose X+ to be R1
    - Choose X union attributes not in X+ as R2
    - Compute the projection of functional dependencies for both R1 and R2
    - Recursively decompose R1 and R2 using the algorithm

Example:

R(ABCDE) and FDs: AB->C, DE->C, B->D

Keys: ABE 

{AB}+ = {ABCD}

R1(ABCD) FDs: B->D, AB -> C,
Key: AB, 

A+ = A
B+ = BD
C+ = C
D+ = D
AB+ = ABCD
BC+ = BCD
CD+ = CD


R2(ABE)

A+ = A
B+ = BD
E+ = E
AB+ = ABCD
BE+ = BED
AE+ = AE

R1(ABCD) FDs: B->D, AB -> C,
Key: AB, 

B+ = BD

R11 = BD FDs: B->D

B+ = BD

R12 = BAC AB->C

B+ = BD
A+ = A
C+ = C
AB+ = ABC

R2(ABE), R11(BD), R12(ABC)

Do we know if the algorithm works?

Properties we want a decomposition to have:
- Elimination of Anomalies
- Recoverability of Information
- Preservation of dependencies 

BCNF gives us the first two

3NF gives us the second two

Nothing gives us all three.

Note that any two-attribute relation is BCNF. Why don't we always decompose into two-attribute relations?

We need to be able to reconstruct the original relation (it must provide for a *lossless join*)

Does our algorithm for decomposition allow for a lossless join?

Does R2 ⨝ R11 ⨝ R12 give us R?

Example: R(ABC), B->C

We decompose into R1(BC) and R2(AB)

let t be a tuple of R: t = (a, b, c)

When we decompose, t becomes (b, c) and (a, b)

When we do a natural join, these tuples join, restoring the original data.

Is that enough? 

t = (a, b, c) and v = (d, b, e)

When we decompose, v becomes (b, d) and (e, b)

When we join, we end up with x = (a, b, e)

Is x in the original relation?

B -> C

Therefore since b = b, c = e, and (a, b, c) was in the original relation

This argument works more generally, on sets of attributes 

## The Chase test for lossless join

Consider a more general situation

We decompose a relation R into sets of attributes S1, S2, ... Sk

We have a set FDs F that hold in R

Is it true that if we project R onto the relations of the decomposition, then we can recover R by taking a natural join?

S1 ⨝ S2 ⨝ ... ⨝ Sk = R ?

Three things to remembers:
1. Naturual join is associative and commutative 
2. Any tuple t in R is in π S1 (R) ⨝ π S2 (R) ⨝ ... π Sk (R)
3. Therefore, π S1 (R) ⨝ π S2 (R) ⨝ ... π Sk (R) = R, when the FDs hold, if every tuple in the join is also in R.


The *chase* test for a lossless join is a way to check if a tuple t in π S1 (R) ⨝ π S2 (R) ⨝ ... π Sk (R) can be proved, using the FDs in F, to be tuple in R.

If t is in the join, then there must by tuples in R t1, t2, ..., tk such that t is the join of the projections of each ti onto the attributes of Si for i = 1, 2, ..., k 

We know that ti agrees with t for the values in the attributes of Si, but it has unknown values for the attributes not in i

We draw a picture of what we know, called a *tableau*

Assuming R has attributes A, B, C..., we use values a, b, c... for the components of t

Example R(ABCD) FDs: A->B, B->C, CD->A
S1=AD, S2=AC, S3=BCD

Tableau:
``` 
A   B   C   D
-------------
a   b1  c1  d
a   b2  c   d2
a3  b   c   d

Apply A -> B
A   B   C   D
-------------
a   b1  c1  d
a   b1  c   d2
a3  b   c   d

Apply B -> C
A   B   C   D
-------------
a   b1  c   d
a   b1  c   d2
a3  b   c   d

Apply CD -> A
A   B   C   D
-------------
a   b1  c   d
a   b1  c   d2
a   b   c   d

```

Remember that the tableau represents t projected onto the subrelations.

The goal is to use the FDs of R to prove that t is really in R

The last row is now t, the tuple we wanted to prove was in R

When we project R onto AD, AC, and BCD, and rejoin, whatever we get from the join must have been in R.

# Dependency Preservation

It might not always be possible to decompose a relation in BCNF such that we provide for both a lossless join, and preservation of all the original dependencies.

Assume R(ABC) B -> C, and AC -> B 
Find the keys: AC, AB

B->C violates BCNF, so we decompose

BC and AB 

``` 
B   C
------
b1  c1
b2  c1

B   A
------
b1  a1
b2  a1

A   B   C
---------
a1  b1  c1
a1  b2  c1

```

We end up with two tuples that agree on A and C, but disagree on B, violating the FD AC->B 

## Third Normal Form

The solution to the above problem to relax the BCNF requirement slightly in situations where a dependency cannot be preserved.

The relaxed condition is called Third Normal Form (3NF)

A relation is in 3NF whenever, for any nontrivial FD A->B, either:
- A is a superkey 
- Every member of B is also a member of a key

We can decompose a relation R into a set of subrelations such that:
- The relations are all in 3NF
- The decomposition has a lossless join
- The decomposition preserves the original dependencies

### Algorithm for decomposing into 3NF

Input: a relation R, and a set of FDs F that hold in R

Output: a decomposition of R into a set of relations, each of which is in 3NF, such that decomposition provides for a lossless join, and dependencies are preserved

1. Find a minimal basis for F, call it G 
2. For each FD X->A in G, use XA as the schema of one of the decomposed relations
3. If none of the relation schemas from (2) is a superkey for R, add an additional relation whose schema is a key for R

Example: R(ABCDE) AB->C, C->B, A->D
Keys: ABE, ACE

Find a minimal basis:

- Compute the closure of the left side of each FD, using the other two
    - If the closure contains the right side of that FD, the FD wasn't necessary, so the basis isn't minimal 
- The prove that we can't drop any elements from the left side of a FD
    - example: AB->C. If the closure of either A or B contains C, then we can reduce the FD

We already have a minimal basis

R1(ABC), R3(AD), R4(ABE)

Does it work?

We need to check three things:
- Does is provide for a lossless join?
- Dependency preservation? Each FD in the minimal basis is represented, in its entirety, in some subrelation.
- Is each subrelation in 3NF? 

−
∪
∩
σ
π
×
⨝ 
θ
ρ
⊆
∅