# Stored Procedures

PSM: Persistent Stored Modules

An extension to SQL provided by the different implementations, that allows us to write procedures and store them in the database as part of the schema

This lets us do things we couldn't do in just SQL

We can invoke these procedures in other SQL statements 

Each implementation provides its own implementation of PSM

## Procedure Declaration

``` 
CREATE PROCEDURE name (parameters)
    < local declarations > 
    < procedure body>;
```

We can also `CREATE FUNCTION`, which is fundamentally the same, expect that it must return a value

``` 
CREATE FUNCTION name (parameters) RETURNS type
```

Parameters are mode-name-type triples

Each parameter has a mode: `IN`, `OUT`, `INOUT` (`IN` is the default)

Mode may be omitted

Function parameters may only be `IN`

## Postgres procedural language

PL/pgSQL

Why use a stored procedure?

Advantages:
   - Code for maintaining the database stays with the database
   - Saves round trips with data. Everything is executed on the database server

Postgres is very extensible. PSMs can be written in C, Perl, Tcl, and Python, as well as PL/pgSQL

It's also possible to create extensions in other languages. Open source options for Java, Lua, R, sh, JavaScript 

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION name(parameters) RETURNS TYPE AS 
'function body'
LANGUAGE plpgsql;

CREATE FUNCTION name(parameters) RETURNS TYPE AS 
$$function body$$
LANGUAGE plpgsql;
```

The function body is stored as a string-literal. By default, we'd have to escape any single quotes or backslashes in our procedure code

We can use something called "dollar quoting" instead

Code is structured as blocks

```
[<<label>>]
[ DECLARE 
    declarations ]
BEGIN
    statements;
END [label];
```

Labels are usually optional, the end label is not required

Blocks can be nested, masking the outer block's variables. You can still access the outer block's variables, you have to prefix them with the label

### Declarations

All variables used in a block must be declared

Variables can have any SQL datatype.
- also `ROW` (represents the row of a table)
- `RECORD` (like row, but with no predefined structure)

`name type [:= expression]`

We can use previously defined types

`student_grade grades.grade%TYPE`

`grade_data grades%ROWTYPE`

Parameters are named with $1, $2, ..., $n

We can optionally give names 

```postgresql
CREATE PROCEDURE foo(IN bar CHAR) AS $$
  BEGIN
    return $1;
end;
  $$ language plpgsql;

CREATE PROCEDURE foo(CHAR, OUT baz CHAR ) AS $$
  DECLARE 
    bar ALIAS FOR $1;
  BEGIN
    baz = bar || ' and more';
    return bar;
end;
  $$ language plpgsql;
```

What about modes?

An `OUT` parameter effectively starts as NULL. `OUT` parameters are most useful when you need to return multiple values. 

### Expressions

All expressions are processed using the server's SQL executor. 

So `if expression then` becomes `SELECT expression`, which is passed to the main SQL engine. Variables are replaced with parameters. (Like prepared statements)

### Basic Statements

#### Assignment

`variable = expression` or `variable := expression`

The expression must return a single value (that value could be a row or tuple)

To execute a statement with no result (e.g., `INSERT`). Just include the statement

The `PERFORM` keyword allows us to invoke other procedures 

Single row result: 

`SELECT attributes INTO target FROM ...`

`SELECT grade INTO student_grade FROM grades WHERE student='xyz'`

or `INSERT ... RETURNING expressions INTO target`

We can use the `STRICT target` keyword to throw an error if less or more than one row is returned.

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION grade_check(email VARCHAR(255)) RETURNS BOOLEAN AS $$
  DECLARE
    student_grade grades.grade%TYPE;
  BEGIN 
    SELECT grade INTO STRICT student_grade 
    FROM grades 
    WHERE student_email = email;
    
    RETURN student_grade >= .6;
end;
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql
```

### Control Structures

#### Return statements

`RETURN` takes two forms

`RETURN expression` does what you'd expect

Other variants: 
- `RETURN NEXT expression`
- `RETURN QUERY query`
- `RETURN QUERY EXECUTE command-string`

These variants build up a result set. Each subsequent `RETURN ...` statement adds an element to that set. 

Finally `RETURN;` actually exits the function, returning the result set.

#### Conditionals

- `IF ... THEN ... END IF`
- `IF ... THEN ... ELSE ... END IF`
- `IF ... THEN ... ELSIF ... ELSE ... ENDIF`

Multiple `ELSIF` are possible 

`CASE ... WHEN ... THEN ... ELSE ... END CASE`

If the CASE statement doesn't match anything, an exception is raises.

``` 
CASE x 
    WHEN 1, 2 THEN
       msg := ' one or two';
    ELSE 
        msg := 'other';
END CASE
```

#### Loops

More or less what you'd expect from a programming language

``` 
<<label>>
LOOP
    statements;
END LOOP [label]
```

`EXIT` breaks out of the loop, `CONTINUE` starts the next iteration 

Labels are useful in nested loops

```
FOR name IN expression .. expression [BY expression] LOOP
    statements;
END LOOP;

```

More useful to be able to loop through query results

``` 
FOR target IN query LOOP
    statements
END LOOP
```

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION failing_grades(email VARCHAR(255)) RETURNS SETOF DOUBLE PRECISION AS $$
  DECLARE
    student_grade grades.grade%TYPE;
  BEGIN
    FOR student_grade IN 
      SELECT grade 
      FROM grades 
      WHERE student_email = email LOOP
        
      IF student_grade < .6 THEN 
        RETURN NEXT student_grade;
      END IF;
      
    end loop;    
    
    RETURN;
end;
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;
  

SELECT failing_grades('bob@example.com');
```

The target variable must be declared in the `DECLARE` block

There's also a variant that's similar to prepared statements

And a `FOREACH` syntax for arrays 

#### Exceptions 

By default, any error thrown will abort both the function/procedure, and the surrounding transaction

You can have an `EXCEPTION` block after the statements but before the `END` to catch errors.

Error conditions are defined by both name and `SQLSTATE`, similar to an enumerated type. All have an integer value

Remember that blocks can be nested, so this is often an effective way to add error handling 

Additional information about the state of execution at the time of the error can be retrieved using 

`GET STACKED DIAGNOSTICS variable = item` where item is from a predefined list like `RETURNED_SQLSTATE` and `MESSAGE_TEXT` 

#### Cursors

SQL also has the concept of a CURSOR, similar to an iterator, for looping through the result of a query, but only loading a few rows at a time.

There's support for looping over a cursor in stored procedures. 

A procedure can also return an opened cursor for use by the procedure caller. 

### Errors

You can call `RAISE` with a number of different arguments to raise an exception/error. `LEVEL` is one of the arguments. The default is `EXCEPTION`. 

You can also use `ASSERT condition, message`, where condition is a boolean expression. That's helpful for debugging.

# Triggers

Triggers: event-condition-action rules. 

Unlike standard SQL, where the `CREATE TRIGGER` statement has the code for the action to be taken, in Postgres we define a special type of function that will be attached to the trigger.

```postgresql
CREATE TRIGGER grade_check 
AFTER UPDATE OF grade ON grades
REFERENCING 
    OLD ROW AS oldTuple
FOR EACH ROW 
WHEN ( grade > oldTuple.grade )
EXECUTE PROCEDURE foo();
``` 

## Trigger Options

Timing: `BEFORE`, `AFTER`, `INSTEAD OF`

Event: `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, and `TRUNCATE`

We can optionally limit the trigger to a subset of attributes

`WHEN` clause is optional 

`REFERENCING` clause is optional

`FOR`
- `EACH ROW`: row level: trigger executes once for each tuple that changes
- `EACH STATEMENT`: statement level: trigger executes once per triggering statement 


## Triggers in Postgres

Can specify multiple events: `BEFORE UPDATE OR DELETE ON ...`

`OLD` and `NEW` are variables for the tuple updated. This allows you to reference them in the `WHEN` condition 

We create a special fuction

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION foo() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
  
  BEGIN
    -- do some logging 
    RETURN NEW;
end;
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;
```

Within the function, a number of variables are available, including `OLD` and `NEW`.

The function must return `NULL` or a record/row value having the exact structure of the table the trigger was fired for. 

Returning `NULL` in a `BEFORE` trigger will halt the rest of the operation. 

A non-null value replaces the new tuple

`NEW` is always effectively NULL in `DELETE` operations

But the trigger must return a non-null value to allow the operation to proceed. 

The return value of `AFTER` operations is always ignored. The trigger can still halt the operation by throwing/raising an error. 

```postgresql
CREATE FUNCTION grade_floor() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
  DECLARE 
    modified grades%ROWTYPE;
  BEGIN 
    IF NEW.grade < OLD.grade THEN
      RETURN NULL;
    ELSE 
      modified = NEW;
      modified.grade = .75;
      RETURN modified;
    END IF;
end;
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;

CREATE TRIGGER grade_floor_trigger
BEFORE UPDATE OF grade ON grades
FOR EACH ROW 
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE grade_floor();
  
UPDATE grades set grade=.8 WHERE grade >= .6 ;
```

```postgresql
CREATE TABLE grade_log(
  old_grade DOUBLE PRECISION,
  new_grade DOUBLE PRECISION,
  updated TIMESTAMP DEFAULT now(),
  updater VARCHAR(255)
);

CREATE FUNCTION grade_logger() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
  BEGIN 
    INSERT INTO grade_log(old_grade, new_grade, updated, updater) 
    VALUES (OLD.grade, NEW.grade, now(), 'username');
    
    RETURN NEW;
end;
  $$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;

CREATE TRIGGER grade_log_trigger
AFTER UPDATE ON grades
FOR EACH ROW 
EXECUTE PROCEDURE grade_logger();
```