# Arranging Data On Disk

A data element like a tuple is represented by a record, which is stored in consecutive bytes on disk. 

Collections such as relations are usually stored by placing the records representing their data in one or more blocks. 

Generally, a block holds only tuples from one relations, though there are exceptions

## Fixed length Records

Simplest record consists of fixed length fields, one for each attribute of the represented tuple.

In many cases, the system allows for more efficient reads/writes when the data begins at an address that's a multiple of 4 or 8. Space not used by a previous field is then wasted.

Records often begin with a header, which might include:
- A pointer to the schema 
- The length of the record
- Timestamps about last access or updates
- Pointers to the fields (this can a substitute for the schema)

Records are stored in blocks. 

There's also a Block Header:
- Links to one or more other blocks (as in an index structure)
- Information about the role played by the block 
- Information about the relation to which the block's tuples belong
- A "directory" giving the offfset of each record in the block 
- Timestamp data

## Representing Block and Record Addresses

In memory, a block's address is the memory address of its first byte.

A record's address is the address of its first byte.

On disk, it's more complicated: Block address may contain Disk ID, Cylinder number, etc. 

A record's address is the block address plus some offset. 

### Addresses in a Client-Server system 

We'll think about main memory as a client system

The server system manages secondary storage. 

Server record addresses are:
- Physical address: host, disk, cylinder, track, block
- Logical address: arbitrary string of bytes

The server system maintains a map table between logical and physical addresses. Note that physical addresses may be long. 

Indirection (logical -> physical) allows for flexibility. As the server system moves records around, we only update update their physical location in one place (the map table).

Similar option: offset table, available for records within blocks. Allows for moving records around within the block without having to update pointers. 
- Allows for a "forwarding address" if we move to a different block
- "Tombstone" record if the record is deleted

### Pointer Swizzling

Often pointers are part of records

Not common for records representing tuples

Common for objects, usually necessary for index structures

When records are in secondary storage, we use their "database address" (the logical address known by the secondary storage system).

When the record is in main memory, we have the option to use either the memory address or the data address
- Generally more efficient to use the memory address when possible, because then we can just follow the pointer. 
- When we use the database address, it must translated into a memory address by a translation table. 

We try to avoid the cost of repeatedly translating database addresses using "pointer swizzling."

Basic idea: when we move a block from secondary storate to main memory, its pointers may be swizzled: translated to memory address. 

So a pointer actually has two parts:
- A bit indicating whether it's a memory or database address
- The actual address (not all space may be used, as memory addresses are often shorter)

Strategies for swizzling:
- Automatic: done when the block is brought into memory
- On demand: leave pointers unswizzled initially. If we end up following a pointer, we swizzle it then
- No swizzling
- Programmer control: there may be cases where an application developer may know in advance if the pointers are likely to be used

When we return blocks to disk, we need to unswizzle their pointers. 

#### Pinned Records and Blocks

A block in memory may be "pinned" if it can't safely be written back to disk at a given time. 

Pointer swizzling is one reason that blocks may become pinned. 

Imagine Block B1 contains a swizzled pointer to Block B2. We can't move B2 back before unswizzling the pointer in B1.

## Variable Length Data and Records

Not all data is fixed in length:
- Data items whose size varies
- Repeating fields 
- Variable format records (records representing XML for example)
- Large fields (mpeg data)

# Index Structures

Consider `SELECT * FROM R WHERE a=10` 

We previously discussed the idea of creating indexes to speed up the process of finding specific tuples/records

An index is a data structure that takes the value of one or more fields (search key) and finds the records with tuples containing the key. 

## Index Structure Basics

Storage structures consist of files, similar to the files used by an operating system: e.g. a data file may store tuples in a relation.

A given data file may have more than one index file. 

Each index file associates values of the search key with pointers to the data file records that have those values. 

Indexes can be:
- Dense: there's an entry for every record of the data file. 
- Sparse: Only some records are represented, often one per block 

Indexes can also be:
- Primary: determines the location for records in the data file
- Secondary: does not determine the location

### Sequential Files

A sequential file is created by sorting the tuples of a relation by their primary key. The tuples are then stored in order. 
- Common to have leave some space in each block for insertion of new records. 

### Dense Indexes

If the records are sorted, we can build a *dense index*, which is a sequence of blocks holding only the keys of the records, and pointers to the records. 
- The index must be maintained in the same order as the tuples themselves
- Generally most useful when the whole index will fit into memory

The number of blocks in the index is small compared to the size of the relation (number of data blocks)

Keys are sorted, we can use a binary search, so lookup is O log N

### Sparse Indexes

Sparse indexes have one key-pointer pair for each block of the data file

Much less space is required

A sparse index can only be used if the data file is sorted on the search key. 

### Multiple Levels of Index

Index files may not all fit in main memory and so might require multiple disk I/Os to retrieve a record. 

An index on an index reduces this problem. 

(Generally, we prefer B-Trees)

### Secondary Indexes

Does not determine the placement of records in the data file. 

It tells us the location of records, which may have already been determined by a primary index.

Secondary indexes are always dense. 

#### Applications of Secondary Indexes:

- Additional indexes on other search keys 
- Some storage structures (Heap)
- Clustered Files

### Clustered Files

Assume some relation R with a many-to-one relationship with another relation S.

Grade -> Students 

Grades are frequently retrieved with students. Rather than storing the grade tuples separately, we can store them with the related student tuples. 

Then we create a secondary index for Grades. 

### Indirection in Secondary Indexes

If a search key appears n times in the data file, it must also appear n times in the index file.

It could be better to write the value once for all the pointers to records for that file. 

We use "buckets" (a level of indirection). Each search key has a pointer to a bucket, and that bucket has the pointers to the records for that key. 

Saves spaces as long as the search key is larger than a pointer, and the average key appears twice. 

Other advantages: we can use the pointers in the buckets to improve the query before we've retrieved any data.

`SELECT * FROM course WHERE semester='S19' AND location='DCC308' AND time='MR10-12'`

Find the pointers that satisfy all conditions, before the data is retrieved. 

### Document Retrieval and Inverted Indexes

Common challenege is the retrieve all documents that contain a given keyword. 

Think of a document as a tuple in a relation `Doc`

`Doc` has many attributes, one for each possible word.

Each attribute is boolean (either the document contains the word/attribute or it doesn't)

Build a secondary index on each attribute of `Doc`. However, we don't store pointers to records where the value is False. 

Instead of having separate indexes. we create one large index, called an *inverted index*. It uses buckets for space efficiency. 

We can expand the index to consider other contextual information (such as where the word appears in the document). 

This allows more complex queries without actually retrieving any data, as we can again compare sets of pointers. 

## B-Trees

B-Trees are a family of data structures used for indexes. 

B-Trees:
- Automatically maintain as many levels of index as is appropriate for the size of the file being indexed
- Manage the space on the blocks they use, so that every block is between half full and full
- Organize their blocks so that the tree is balanced: all paths from the root to leaf have the same length
    - Generally have three layers

There is a a paramater n associated with a given B-Tree. Each block will have space for n search-key values, and n+1 pointers.

We pick n to be as large as possible, given the constraints.

Example: Block size of 4096 bytes. Search Key is an integer (4 bytes), and pointers are 8 bytes. What is n?

4n + 8(n+1) <= 4096

4n + 8n + 8 <= 4096

12n <= 4088

n = 340

What's in a B-Tree Block?

- Keys in leaf nodes are copies of keys from the data file.
    - They are distributed among the leaves in sorted order
- At the root there are at least two used pointers. 
    - All pointers point to blocks at the level below
- At a leaf node, the last pointer points to the next leaf block
    - The other used pointers (at least (n+1)/2 of them) point to data records 
    - The ith pointer points to a record containing the ith key value 
- At an interior node, all n+1 pointers can be used to point to blocks at the next level 
    - At least (n+1)/2 are used
    - If j pointers are used, there will be j-1 search key values: K1, K2, ..., Kj-1
        - The first pointer points to a part of the tree with values less than K1
        - The second pointer points to a part of the tree with values of at least K1, and less than K2
        - The last pointer goes to a part of the tree with values greater than Kj-1
        - Note that some values far less than K1 or far greater than Kj-1 might not be accessible from this node at all
- All used pointers and their key appear at the beginning of the block, except the n+1 pointer in a leaf, which points to the next leaf.