# Relational Algebra (cont'd)

There can equivilences between operators:

R ∩ S =  R − (R − S) 

R ⨝ c S = σ c (R × S)

It's the job of the Query Optimizer to find the optimal approach. 

## Constrains on Relations

Two ways to express contrains in Relation Algebra:
1. If R is an expression, then R = ∅ is a constraint that says that the value of R must be empty (or there no tuples in R).
2. If R and S are expressions, then R ⊆ S is a constraint that says every tuple in R must also be in S.

Ultimately, both express the same concept:

R ⊆ S is the same as saying R − S = ∅
R = ∅ is the same as saying R ⊆ ∅

### Referential Integrity Constraints 

A referential intrigrity constraint asserts that a value appearing in one context must also appear in another related context.

In general, we can express this as:

π a (R) ⊆ π b (S)

or 

π a (R) − π b (S) = ∅

Note that this is often called a "Foreign key constraint"

We can use more than one attribute in our constraints.

For example, consider a relation: Enroll(student, course, semester)

We want to assert that no student will be enrolled in a course that doesn't exist

π course, semester (Enroll) ⊆ π name, semester (Course)

### Key constraints

Key constraints can also be expressed this way

{name, semester} is the key for course.

Therefore, if two tuples agree on both name and semester, they must also agree on location

If we construct all possible pairs of tuples for Course. We shouldn't be able to find any tuples that agree on name and semester, but don't agree on location.

σ c1.name = c2.name AND c1.semester = c2.semester AND c1.location != c2.location (Course × Course) = ∅

### Additional constraints

We can use this notation for other constraints as well

σ capacity < 1 (Course) = ∅

Assume relations:

Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity)
Classroom(location, capacity)

σ c1.capacity > c2.capacity AND c1.location = c2.location (Course × Classroom)  = ∅


# Design Theory for Relational Databases

There are lots of approaches for designing a schema for a relational database for an application.

It's common for the initial attempt to have room for improvement, especially by eliminating redundancy. 

For example: Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity, instructor, student)

Problems are often caused by trying to fit too much in a single relation.

There's a well developed theory for relational databases "dependencies," their implications for what makes a good relational database schema, and what can be done about potential flaws.

## Functional Dependencies

We start by looking at the constraints that apply to a relation. The most common is a "functional dependency," which generalizes the idea of a key for a relation.

A functional dependency is a statement of the form that if two tuples of some relation R agree on some set of attributes: a1, a2, ..., an, then they must also agree on some other set of attributes: b1, b2, ..., bm.

We write this as: a1, a2, ... an -> b1, b2, ... bm

We say that the a's functionally determine the b's.

The a's and the b's may appear anywhere in the schema. There's no requirement that the a's appear first. 

If we can be sure that every instance of R will be one where the FD is true, then we say that R *satisfies* the FD.

Remember that we are asserting a constraint on R, not just making an observation about one particular instance. 

It's common, though not a requirement for the right hand side of a FD to be a single attribute:

a1, a2, ... an -> b1, b2, ... bm

becomes

a1, a2, ... an -> b1
a1, a2, ... an -> b2
...
a1, a2, ... an -> bm

Examples: Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity, registered, instructor, student, major)

- name, semester -> location, time
- student -> major (students with dual majors?)
- location, time, instructor -> name, semester
- semester, location, time -> name
- semester, time -> instructor (what about multiple instructors?)
- name, semester -> capacity, registered

## Keys of Relations

We say that a set of attributes {a1, a2, ..., an} is a key for a relation R if:
1. The set of attributes functionally determine all the other attributes
2. No proper subset of the attributes functionally determines all the others (a key must be minimal)

Keys for our Course Example:

{name, semester, student}
{time, semester, student}
others?

A relation may have more than one key. It's common to designate one "primary key," but it has no meaning in relational theory. 

A set of attributes that contains a key is called a *superkey*

Every key is a superkey, but not every superkey is a key (it might not be minimal).

Other texts may refer to a key as a "candidate key," and refer to a superkey as just a "key."


## Rules about Functional Dependencies

Assume R(A, B, C) and FDs: A -> B, and B -> C
Does R satisfy A -> C?

We must show that two tuples that agree on A must also agree on C.

Assume two tuples: (a1, b1, c1) and (a1, b2, c2).

Since they agree on a, they must also agree on b

b1 = b2

(a1, b1, c1) and (a1, b1, c2)

Since they agree on b, they must also agree c

c1 = c2

Therefore A -> C

FD's can be presented in a variety of different ways without changing the set of legal instances of the relation.
- Two sets of FDs S and T are *equivalent* if the set of of relation instances that satisfy S is exactly the same as the set of relation instances that satisfy T.
- A set of FDs S *follows* from a set of FDs T if every relation instance that satisfies T also satisfies S.

Two sets of FDs S and T are equivalent if S follows from T, and T follows from S.

### Splitting and Combining Rule

a1, a2, ... an -> b1, b2, ... bm

can become

a1, a2, ... an -> b1
a1, a2, ... an -> b2
...
a1, a2, ... an -> bm

We can split attributes of the right hand side (Splitting Rule)

We can do the reverse as well, combine FDs that have the same left side. (Combining Rule)

No splitting left sides

### Trivial FDs

A constraint of any kind is said to be trivial if it holds true for every instance of the relation, regardless of what other constraints are asserted.

It's easy to determine if a FD is trivial:

a1, a2, ... an -> b1, b2, ... bm is trivial when 

{b1, b2, ... bm} ⊆ {a1, a2, ... an}

A trivial FD has a right side that is a subset of its left side.

R(a, b, c) 
ab -> a is trivial


Trivial dependency rule:

The FD a1, a2, ... an -> b1, b2, ... bm is equivalent of 

a1, a2, ... an -> c1, c2, ... ck where the C's are all the B's that are not also A's

Example: R(A, B, C, D)
AB -> AC is equivalent to AB -> C

### Computing the closure of Attributes

Suppose {a1, a2, ..., an} is a set of attributes and S is a set of FDs.

The *closure* of {a1, a2, ..., an} under S is the set of attributes B, such that every relation that satisfies all the FDs in S, also satisfies {a1, a2, ..., an} -> B

or {a1, a2, ..., an} -> B follows from S

{a1, a2, ..., an}+

We compute the closure by starting with the set of attributes and "pushing out" by adding the right hand side of FDs in S as soon as we've added their left hand side.

**Algorithm** for computing the closure of attributes

Input: a set of attributes A, and FDs S
Output: A+

1. If necessary, split the FDs in S so that each has a single attribute on its right side
2. Let X be the set of attributes that will become the closure. Initialize X to A.
3. Repeatedly search for some FD B -> C such that B ⊆ X, but C is not in X.
    - Add C to X, and repeate
    - When nothing more can be added to X, stop.

Example:

R(a, b, c, d, e)
ab -> c, bc -> ad, d -> e

Compute {ab}+

ab -> c, 
bc -> a
bc -> d, 
d -> e

X = {a, b, c, d, e}

Example 2:

R (a, b, c, d, e, f)
ab -> c
de -> f
fe -> c

Compute {de}+

X = {defc}


By computing the closure of a set of attributes, we can determine whether any given FD A->B follows from S:
- Compute {A}+, if B ⊆ {A}+, then A -> B follows from S.

### Closures and Keys

If {A}+ contains all of the attributes for a given relation, then A is a superkey for that relation.

A functionally determines the whole schema. 

We can text if A is a key by first checking that {A}+ contains all of the attributes, and then checking that no subset of A has a closure that contains all the attributes.

Essentially, we want to show that every attribute of A is necessary to functionally determine the other attributes of the relation.

## Closing Sets of Functional Dependencies

For a given set of FDs S, any set of FDs that's equivalent to S is called a *basis*

A *minimal basis* for a relation is a basis B that satisfies three conditions:
1. All of the FDs in B have a singleton right side
2. If any FD is removed from B, the result is no longer a basis
3. If for any FD in B, we remove one or more elements from its left side, the result is no longer a basis.

Note that no trivial FD can be part of a minimal basis, because it would be removed by (2)

### Armstrong's Axioms

Used to derive any F that follows from a given set of FDs.

- Reflexivity: If B ⊆ A, then A -> B (Trivial FDs)
- Augmentation: If A -> B, then AC -> BC, for any set of attributes C. Since some of C's may be A's or B's, we should remove duplicates.
- Transitivity: If A -> B, and B -> C, then A -> C

We can compute the closure of a set of FDs by repeated applications of Armstrong's Axioms.

## Projecting Functional Dependencies

We also need to be able to answer the following:

Given a relation R, with FDs S, if we project R: R1 = π l (R), for some list of attributes l.

What FDs hold in R1?

We compute the Projection of Functional Dependencies, which is the set of FDs that:
- Follow from S, and
- involve only attributes of R1,

We can simplify S first by removing redudundanices. But in general the complexity of the process is exponential, based on the number of attributes in R1. 

**Algorithm**: Projecting Functional Dependencies

Input: Relations R, and R1 = π l (R), and a set of FDs S that hold in R

Output: the set of FDs that hold in R1

1. Let T = {}. This will hold the eventual output
2. For each set of attributes X that is a subset of the attributes of R1, compute X+ with respect to S
    - Add to T all nontrivial FDs X -> A such that A is in both X+, and R1
3. Now T is a basis for the FDs that hold in R1, but it may not minimal.
    - If there is a FD F in T that follows from the other FDs in T, remove F from T
    - Let Y->B  be a FD in T with at least two attributes in Y, and Z->B be Y->B with one attribute removed. If Z->B follows from the FDs in T, remove Y->B 
    - Repeat until no changes are made


Example: 

R(abcd)
a -> b
b -> c
c -> d

R1 = π acd (R)

T = {a->c, c->d}

a+ = {abcd}
c+ = {cd}
d+ = {d}
ac (can't give us anything new)
dc+ = {dc}
ad (can't give us anything new)

# Design of Relational Database Schema

*Anomalies* are problems, such as redudancy, that arise when we try to put too much into a single relation.

3 main types:
- Redundancy: information may repeated in multiple tuples.
- Update Anomalies: we may change the information in one tuple but leave the same information unchanged in another.
- Deletion Anomalies: if a set of values becomes empty, we may lose other information as a side effect.

Examples: Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity, registered, instructor, student, major)

## Decomposing Relations

We eliminate anomalies by *decomposing* relations: splitting them into smaller relations.

Given a relation R(a1, a2, ..., an), we decompose R into two Relations: S(b1, b2, ..., bm) and T(c1, c2, ..., ck) such that:
- {a1, a2, ..., an} = {b1, b2, ..., bm} ∪ {c1, c2, ..., ck}
- S = π b1, b2, ..., bm (R)
- T = π c1, c2, ..., ck (R)


Examples: Class(name, semester, location, time, capacity, registered, instructor, student, major)

becomes 
Course(name, semester, location, time, capacity, registered, instructor) and
Enroll(name, semester, student, major)

It's not always that simple. We need to be able to reconstruct the original information.

## Boyce Codd Normal Form (BCNF)

A condition under which the anomalies above can be guaranteed to not to exist.

A relation R is in BCNF if and only if whenever there is nontrivial FD A -> B for R, it is the case that the A is a superkey of R. (The left side of every FD must be a superkey).

Decomposing into BCNF:
 
By repeatedly choosing suitable decompositions, we can break any relation schema into a collection of subsets of its attributes with the following properties:
- The subsets are all in BCNF
- The data in the original relation is faithfully represented by the data in the relations that are the result of the decomposition

We need to be able to reconstruct the original instance exactly from the decomposed relation instances.

The strategy is to look for a nontrivial FD A->B that violates BCNF.

We can optionally add to the right side as many attributes as are determined by A.

Then we break up R into two subsets:

R1 = A ∪ B
R2 = A ∪ everything else that's not B

We keep applying the algorithm recursively to the results of each decomposition until no violations remain.

−
∪
∩
σ
π
×
⨝ 
θ
ρ
⊆
∅