# SQL in Applications

## Architectures

### 3-Tier / N-Tier Architectures

Applications are built and deployed in 3 tiers:
- Web Tier
- Application Tier
- Database Tier

**Web Tier** manages interaction with the user. 

More common now to handle serving the code that handles interaction with the user, and then handles the interaction with that code.

Apache, Tomcat, etc. 

Not just a website anymore. Now might include API (REST), SOAP, GraphQL

**Application Tier** turns data from the database(s) into a response to the request that it receives from the web tier.

Often called the "business logic" of the application. 

It may have sub-tiers to support database integration: many applications connect to multiple, independent databases. 

**Database Tier** manages connections to the database. 

It does two main things:
- Manages connections (possibly maintaining a connection pool)
- Manages conversion between SQL datatypes and whatever is needed by the application tier

### Microservices Architecture

Alternative to N-Tier systems.

N-tier systems tend to be monolithic. 

This has drawbacks:
- Any change to any tier requires a complete rebuild and reployment of the entire application. 
- Scaling a monolithic application requires scaling the whole thing. 

Microservices architecture looks at an app as a suite of separate services, which can:
- be built and redeployed independently
- scaled independently 

Common attributes of microservices architectures:

- Decentralized Governance: teams manage each service more or less independently
- Decentralized Data Management: conceptual model of the data will be different between different teams and services 
- Domain-driven design: A complex domain is divided into multiple contexts, and relationships between them are mapped as needed

Microservices also decentralize data storage, including using multiple storage techniques ("Polyglot persistence")

Transactions may be delayed ("eventual consistency"). The application must be able to deal with temporary inconsistencies. 

## SQL Environment 

A SQL environment is the framework in which data may exist and SQL operations on data may be executed. 

In practice, we think of a DBMS running on some installation. Every SQL element we've discussed is defined within a SQL environment and is organized into a hierarchy of structures.

1. Schemas: collections of tables, indexes, triggers, procedures, etc. Basic units of organization. Close to what we think of as a "database" 

2. Catalogs: collections of schemas. Basic unit for supporting unique, accessible terminology. Names of schemas must be unique within a catalog. 
    - Each catalog contains an `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`
3. Clusters: collection of catalogs. Each user has a cluster--the set of catalogs visible to that user (the "database" as it appears to the user).

### Schemas

`CREATE SCHEMA name <element declaractions>`

We don't need to add everthing at once. 

`SET SCHEMA name` command lets us set the "active" schema. 

*Postgres*: `SET SEARCH_PATH TO name`

Other schema elements:
- Domains: sets of values or types (not often used anymore) 
- Character sets
- Collations: essentially an ordering of characters 
- Grant statements: access controls

### Connections

A *connection* is a connection between a SQL server and a client.

Usually has a username and password (or similar authentication)

Connections can be named 

The SQL operations that are performed while a connection is active form a *session*.

A session lasts as long as the connection that created it

Each session has a current catalog and schema 

An authorized user exists for each session 

## JDBC Java Database Connectivity

Similar to the PSQL CLI, but for Java programs connecting to a DBMS.

Java specifies an API, each DBMS implementation provides a jar-file with driver implementations 

[Postgres Driver](https://jdbc.postgresql.org/download.html)