# Database Overview

What is a database?

A database is nothing more than a collection of information that exists over a long period of time.

A database is a collection of information that's managed by a Database Management System

## DBMS Database Management System

What do we want a database to do?

Class suggestions:
- Concurrency
- Queryable
- Data integrity
- Be able to update/change data
- Store a variety of data
- Back up
- Relate different pieces of data based on shared features
- Be able to store large amounts of data

A database should:
1. Allow users to create new databases and specify their *schemas* using a specialized *Data Definition Language*.
2. Give users the ability to query the data and modify the data using a *query language*. 
3. Support the storage of very large amounts of data, over a long period of time, allowing efficient access to the data for queries and data modification.
4. Enable durability, the recovery of the database in the face of failures
5. Control access to data from many users at once, without allowing unexpected interaction among users (*isolation*), and without actions on the data being performed partially but not completely (*atomicity*).

## Brief History

First commercial database products appeared in the late 1960's. They were mostly based around file systems.

How well do filesystems perform as Databases?
- Provide some of (3) 
- (5) not supported
- (1) partially supported (we can create the directory structure)
- (2) not really supported (possibly basic search)
- (4) kind of supported (disk backups)

Early applications of DBMS involved situations where the data was composed of many small items that were frequently updated or queried

Examples:
- Airlines
- Banks
- Corporations

Early DBMS required users to visualize the data more or less as it was stored.

Several data models existed; most common were:
- Hierachical model (tree structure)
- Graph model (network structure)

Did not support higher level query languages. Programs were complex to write, even for simple queries.

In 1970, EF Codd published a paper describing the Relational Data Model, which presented the data to user as a series of tables called relations. Under the hood, the data could be stored in a data structure that allowed for rapid responses to queries.

By the 1990's relational databases were the norm. 

Since then, we've seen a deviation in scale:

**Smaller Systems** DBMS no longer require a massive mainframe systems. The software can run on a variety of very small hardward. Also, semi-structured approaches like XML allow for storing large amounts of data in collections of small documents. 

**Larger Data** the amount of data stored in modern systems is huge (petabytes and exobytes)

Today, the problem is one of information integration. Data may be widely distributed across a number of separate databases and needs to be joined. 

Two general approaches:
- Data warehouse: data from multiples sources is copied periodically (and translated as necessary) into a single central database
- Middleware: software to support translation between multiple different data models into one single, unified data model.

## Overview of a DBMS

Two basic use-cases:
- Users (application code) that ask for data or modify it
- Database administrators who are responsible for the structure of the data

Second type is easier to process: commands (in Data Definition Language) are processed by a DDL compiler, passed to an execution engine, and then index/file/resource manager alters the appropriate metadata.

### Query Processing overview: 

Data Manipulation Language commands are handled by two subsystems:

#### A system to answer the query

*Query compiler* processes the incoming query, and creates a *query plan*

The query plan is passed to the *execution engine* which executes the plan. It request data from a *resource manager* which uses index files to find the correct data files. Requests for data go through the *buffer manager*. The buffer manager communicates with a *storage manager* to retrieve the correct data file.

#### Transaction Processing

Queries and other DML actions are grouped *transactions* (units that must be executed atomically and in isolation from each other).

A transaction must also be durable.

The transaction processor has two main parts:
- Concurrency control manager (Scheduler), which assures atomicity and isolation
- Logging and Recovery manager, which ensures durability

### More details

### Storage and Buffer Manager

Data is usually stored in "secondary storage" (disk). Operations are done on the data in memory, for performance. 

The *storage manager* controls the placement of the data on disk, and its movement to and from main memory.

The *buffer manager* is responsible for partitioning main memory into buffers (page-sized regions to which disk blocks may be transferred). 

All of the other DBMS components that need to interact with data will do so with the data in the buffers. That data may include:
- Data itself 
- Metadata: structure of, and constraints on, the data
- Log records: information about changes to the database
- Statistics: information gathered and stored about data properties
- Indexes: data structures that support efficient access to the data

### Transaction Processing

Database operations are grouped into *transactions*. Transaction commands are handled by the *transaction manager*.

The transaction manager performs the following tasks:
- Logging: ensures durability (recovery after a crash)
    - A log manager follows a specific policy designed to facilitate recovery
    - A recovery manager can examines the logs to restore the database to a consistent state
    - A log manager that works with the buffer manager to ensure the logs are properly written
- Concurrency Control: transactions must appear to execute in isolation from each other. Most systems have many transactions executing simultaneously.
    - The Scheduler assures that the actions are executed in such a way that isolation appears to be in effect. 
- Deadlock resolution: the transaction manager must also resolve deadlocks that occur when multiple transactions need to access the same resources.

#### ACID properties of transactions

- Atomicity: all or nothing
- Consistency: the transaction must preserve consistency of the data with regards to constraints
- Isolation: the transaction must appear to execute as if no other transaction is executing
- Durability: once the transaction is complete, its effects must be preserved

### Query Processor

The query processor has two main components:
1. Query Compiler, which translates the query into a "query plan"
    - A *query parser* builds a tree structure from the textual version of the query
    - A *query preprocessor* performs semantic checks on the query. Then turns the parse tree into a tree of algebraic operators representing an initial plan
    - A *query optimizer* transforms the initial query plan and transforms it into the best available sequence of operations
2. *Execution Engine* is response for executing the steps in the query plan.

# Data Models

A data model is a notation for describing data or information

There are generally three parts to a data model:
1. Structure of the data: distinct from the Physical Data model. This is the conceptual model.
2. Operations on the data: queries or modifications
3. Constraints on the data

Important data models: two general approaches:
- Relational Model, includes object-oriented extensions
- Semi-structured data model: XML or JSON

A good data model:
- Provides a simple, limited approach to structuring the data, yet is reasonably versatile, allowing anything to be modeled
- Provides a limited yet useful colletion of operations on the data

These limitations become features. A simple data model is easy to understand and reason about. Allows for query languages to express queries simply, while still allowing for optimization.

## Relational Model

Provides a single way to represent data: a two-dimensional table called a relation.

The columns of a relation are called *Attributes*. An attribute usually describes the meaning of the data in the column. 

The name of a relation and its set of attributes are called its *Schema*.

Attributes are described as a set, not a list.

Denote a schema with the name of the relation followed by a list of its attributes in parentheses

`Course(name, semester, time, location, capacity)`

In the relational model, a database consists of one or more relations. The set of schemas is called a relational database schema, or just database schema.

The rows of a relation are called *tuples*.

A tuple has one *component* for each attribute of the relation.

``` 
Course(name, semester, time, location, capacity)
('Database Systems', 'S19', 'MR4-6', 'DCC318', 168)
('Operating Systems', 'S19', 'MR10-12', 'DCC308', 300)
```

Relations are sets of tuples, not lists. (order doesn't matter)

Relations are not static: they change over time. The set of tuples for a given relation at a given point in time is called a *relation instance*. Usually we record only one relation instance, the *current instance*.

Schemas may also change; in practice that's very expensive. 